<script type="text/javascript"
src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.4/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS_HTML-full"></script>

<!-- https://www.tablesgenerator.com/markdown_tables# -->

# Experiment 3: Synthesis of Alum

Illinois Institute of Technology

Henry Post and William Gaylord

Zabel H. Panosyan

02/20/19

# Objective

To learn common techniques for the synthesis of Alum, how to use a b&uuml;chner
funnel to separate solids from liquids, and how to crystallize a liquid
solution.

The objective is also to practice determining the limiting reagent and
calculating percent yield.

# Procedures

A small sample of aluminum foil is torn into small pieces and placed into a
beaker. A weak $\mathrm{KOH}$ solution is added to the foil and the foil is
dissolved. The solution of $\mathrm{KOH}$ and aluminum is then vacuum filtered
to obtain as much dissolved aluminum as possible.

$\mathrm{H_2SO_4}$ is measured and gradually added to the filtered solution,
stirred until no solids remain.
    
The solution is gently boiled until it is at or below $50mL$. The solution is
then put into an ice bath and let sit until $\mathrm{KAl(SO_4)_2 \cdot 12H_2O}$
crystals form. If crystals are not forming fast enough, the beaker containing
the solution is scratched with a glass stirring rod vigorously to encourage
crystal formation.

The alum crystals are collected by vacuum filtration and rinsed with chilled 50%
aqueous ethanol. The crystals are then evenly distributed by a spatula and
allowed to dry, and then weighed.

## Post-lab

### Determining if the correct product has formed

There are a couple of ways to determine if the correct product has formed:

1.  Determine the melting point of the synthesized alum and compare it to the
known melting point of pure alum.

2.  Heat the alum in a crucible to drive off the $\mathrm{12H_2O}$ attached to
the alum, and compare the difference in weight to see if the weights are in
agreement with the weights of the compound.

If $0.855g$ of synthesized (hydrated) alum is heated and the weight of the
dehydrated alum weighs $0.465g$, does this data support the beginning compound
is a dodecahydrate?

I found that if I converted $0.855g \ \mathrm{KAl(SO_4)_2 \cdot 12H_2O}$ into
$\mathrm{KAl(SO_4)_2}$, I got $0.465g$, so this supports that the beginning
compound is a dodecahydrate.

### Adjusting $\mathrm{H_2SO_4}$ strength for molarity

If, instead of $1.5M \ \mathrm{H_2SO_4}$, the lab only had $6.0M
\mathrm{H_2SO_4}$, the adjustments I would need to make to the procedure are:

1.  Adjust the amount of $\mathrm{H_2SO_4}$ that I used by a factor of
    $\frac{1.5M}{6M} = 25\%$.

    This means if I used $50mL$ initially, I would need to use
    $\frac{50}{4}mL=12.5mL$.

2.  Use the updated amount in all of my calculations.

### Experimental design

If I were to repeat this synthesis, there are a few things that I would change
to minimize inaccuracies.

I would not use aluminum foil, or any metal that forms oxides with air. I would
use an intermediate aluminum compound to minimize waste.

The filter paper absorbing alum and solution is also an issue.

#### Sources of error

Aluminum impurities, side-products, and the redissolution of alum crystals into
solution are all sources of error.

The following are sources of error that could cause the percent yield to exceed
100%:

- Impurities in the alum product
- Mis-measuring aluminum foil at the beginning
- The dehydration step not fully dehydrating all alum crystals
- Re-introduction of moisture into the alum crystals

## Conclusion

This lab showed us that it is takes only a few steps to react and crystallize an
alum product from liquid and solid reagents.

In addition to that, we explored the different sources of error that could
affect the final results of a synthesis.

## Result

The limiting reagent in the reaction between $\mathrm{Al}$, $\mathrm{KOH}$, and $\mathrm{H_2SO_4}$ was aluminum.

The result of this experiment found the actual actual yield of alum to be $13.625g$, compared to the theoretical yield of alum of $15.08g$. This gives us a percent yield of $90.35\%$.
