<script type="text/javascript"
src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.4/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS_HTML-full"></script>

<!-- https://www.tablesgenerator.com/markdown_tables# -->

# Experiment 1: Measurements and Density

Illinois Institute of Technology

Henry Post and William Gaylord

Zabel H. Panosyan

02/06/19

# Objective

To determine the density and identity of an unknown solid.

# Procedures

Two empty graduated cylinders are weighed. The graduated cylinders and a buret
are then filled with any amount of water, and the water level is measured and
recorded.

A set of two unknown solids are weighed and then submerged into the graduated
cylinders. The water level is recorded. This step can be repeated to measure any
number of unknown solids.

An unknown solid which is lighter than water is obtained and weighed.

There exist two methods to obtain the density of an unknown solid which is lighter than water:

1. Using a liquid less dense than the sample, i.e. isopropanol

A graduated cylinder is filled with isopropanol and its volume is measured. The
sample is placed in the isopropanol and the volume is measured again.

2. Using a heavy object whose density is known to weigh down the lighter sample

A graduated cylinder is filled with water and its volume is measured. The sample
is placed in the water, and a heavy sample is placed above it. The volume is
measured again.

## Result

The measurement of density with standard deviation is 
$2.2 \pm 0.0632 \frac{g}{mL}$.

Based off of the table of densities, one can conclude that the unknown solid is
a cylinder of Teflon.

## Post-lab

### Accuracy and precision of glassware

Glassware like the 10mL graduated cylinder, volumetric pipet, and buret are the
most accurate and precise tools used to measure liquids used in this lab.

The 100mL graduated cylinder is very accurate and moderately precise in its
measurements.

The 30mL beaker is the worst choice for accurate measurements, and is moderately
precise.

## Observations

The buret, being much longer, takes longer than the graduated cylinders to
settle to a fixed water level when it is being filled.

## Conclusion

### Archimedes Principle

In this lab, the Archimedes principle was put into practice and examples of it
were shown.

The mass of an object was given, but not its volume. The Archimedes principle
was needed here to calculate an object's volume by using water to calculate how
much water the object displaces.

### Lossy Measurements

This lab also involved measuring the density of water to demonstrate the margin
of error that certain glassware can have, and how dramatically that can affect
later calculations.

For example, the density of water is $0.9982 \frac{g}{mL}$, but was calculated
at $1.30 \frac{g}{mL}$ when using a $30mL$ beaker.

### Standard Deviation

At the end of the lab, standard deviation was calculated of measurements of four
unknown solids to show how to calculate the error in measurements.

It turns out that using multiple measurements can increase your accuracy, but
decrease your precision.
